---
layout: post
title:  "SFINAE in C++11 and beyond"
date:   2020-07-08 15:06:06 -0700
tags: cpp template
author: bolu-atx
categories: programming
---

As C++ coder, sooner or later you will encounter elements of meta-programming. 
It might be as simple a STL container. Or it might be a full blown template class that takes variadic arguments.
I, myself, have also taken this journey. As I ventured deeper into meta-programming, acronyms such as CRTP, SFINAE really piqued my interest. Today, let's talk about SFINAE.

**SFINAE** stands for "substitution failure is not an error", and there has been numerous articles, stack overflow questions and blog posts on this topic:

- [SFINAE introduction](https://jguegant.github.io/blogs/tech/sfinae-introduction.html) by Jean Guegant
- [cppreference.com SFINAE](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/sfinae)
- [SFINAE and enable if](https://eli.thegreenplace.net/2014/sfinae-and-enable_if/) by Eli Bendersky

My goal here is not to regurgitate what these excellent resources provide, but to summarize it in a concise way for my own learning and interpretation.

## What problem does it solve?

SFINAE is an idiom, or a programming pattern in C++. At its core, it enables compile time introspection of template parameters for more compact and generalizable code that can be reused later. They are frequently associated template meta-programming - so you should think about when they might come in handy if you work with a lot of templated code.

Through SFINAE, we can write methods / struct / meta-helpers that help us answer questions like:
- Does the template argument `T` passed into this class at compile-time implement the method `foo()`?
- I want to have two `template<int N> Array` implementation (instead of having two different classes `SmallArray`, `LargeArray`) depending on the size of `N`.
- I want to have my template function `template<typename T> foo(T val)` behave differently depending on some condition on `T`, such as if it's a `float` type or an `int` type.

I also think of SFINAE pattern like function overload lookup on steroids, but also extended and applicable for classes, methods etc.

Prior to C++11, SFINAE implementations mostly uses template overload rules and clever use of the side-effects `sizeof` and `typedefs` to achieve this goal. With C++11's introduction of `std::decltype`, `std::declval`, and `std::enable_if`, the SFINAE pattern becomes a little easier to read and understand.


## Case Study
Source: [Stack Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/982808/c-sfinae-examples)

#### C++11 switching f(T) based on whether T is an integer or a float
```cpp
template<typename T>
std::enable_if_t<std::is_integral<T>::value> f(T t){
    //integral version
}

template<typename T>
std::enable_if_t<std::is_floating_point<T>::value> f(T t){
    //floating point version
}
```
`std::enable_if_t` will define a `::value` of type `void` if the substitution is successful, otherwise, it will be undefined, and thereby the function declaration will be disabled at compile time.

To define a different return value type, we can supply our own type as the 2nd argument to `std::enable_if_t`, for example: `std::enable_if_t<std::is_integral<T>::value, T>` would evaluate to T only if the `std::is_integral<T>` is true.


#### Evaluate for logical conditions in the template parameter
```cpp
template<int I> void div(char(*)[I % 2 == 0] = 0) {
    /* this is taken when I is even */
}

template<int I> void div(char(*)[I % 2 == 1] = 0) {
    /* this is taken when I is odd */
}
```
In this example, we have a special syntax `[]` enclosing some boolean expression after the function argument declaration in parenthesis. This was a pretty obscure feature in C++ called [template argument deduction](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/template_argument_deduction#Other_contexts). This is another compile-time evaluation feature where `[I % 2 ==0]` is evaluated at compile time, and depending on what the expression evaluate to, will pick the either the even version, or the odd version.

As an aside, a pretty cool use-case of this template deduction is to extract the # of elements in an array:

```cpp
template<typename T, std::size_t N>                 
constexpr std::size_t arraySize(T (&)[N]) noexcept  
{                                                   
  return N;                                         
}                                                   
```

#### Check whether a class has a certain member of certain type
```cpp
// Header
template<typename T>
struct TypeSink{
    using Type = void;
};

template<typename T>
using TypeSinkT = typename TypeSink<T>::Type;

//use case
template<typename T, typename=void>
struct HasBarOfTypeInt : std::false_type{};

template<typename T>
struct HasBarOfTypeInt<T, TypeSinkT<decltype(std::declval<T&>().*(&T::bar))>> :
    std::is_same<typename std::decay<decltype(std::declval<T&>().*(&T::bar))>::type,int>{};

struct S{
   int bar;
};
struct K{
};

template<typename T, typename = TypeSinkT<decltype(&T::bar)>>
void print(T){
    std::cout << "has bar" << std::endl;
}
void print(...){
    std::cout << "no bar" << std::endl;
}

int main(){
    print(S{});
    print(K{});
    std::cout << "bar is int: " << HasBarOfTypeInt<S>::value << std::endl;
}
```
This is a more complicated example, let's work through it step by step.

First, we have a dummy struct `TypeSink`, of which, the `Type` in its scope is defined as a void type. The `TypeSinkT` is a type alias to refer to the underlying type in the `TypeSink<T>::Type` (I tried to remove it, and the compilers barfed).

`HasBarOfTypeInt` is another dummy struct that derives from `std::false_type{}` - which means `HasBarOfTypeInt::value` will evaluate to false. The second template argument `typename=void` in the struct means that the 2nd type argument will default to void type if unspecified.

In the template partial specialization of `HasBarOfTypeInt<T, TypeSinkT<decltype(std::declval<T&>().*(&T::bar))>>` - the 2nd type argument is checking whether `T` has the member bar inside. If it does, the `TypeSink<int>::Type` is the final type. If `T` does not contain `bar`, then the whole expression will fail- triggering SFINAE (substitution failure is not an error) and results in the 2nd template argument evaluating to `void`,  this then triggers the the fallback instantiation of `std::false_type`.
We also note that this template partial specialization also derives from something else: `std::is_same`, [is_same](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/types/is_same) as explained in the official C++ reference, states that:

    If T and U name the same type (taking into account const/volatile qualifications), provides the member constant value equal to true. Otherwise value is false.

Therefore, `std::is_same` is checking whether the declared type of `bar` is of type int. (`std::decay` removes `const`).

In the test code, we have partial template specialization of `print()` function that takes the 2nd argument of `typename = TypeSinkT<decltype(&T::bar)>`. This specialized function will get called when the `typename = ` evaluates to some concrete type.

#### Check whether a template argument (non-Type) satisfies some criteria
Source: [stack-overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/9510514/integer-range-based-template-specialisation)

```cpp
template<bool> struct Range;
template<typename T, int N = 0, typename = Range<true>>
class Channel
{
    // Implementation for all other cases of N
    // also, N defaults to 0
}

template<typename T, int N>
class Channel<T, N, Range<(N <= 0)> >
{
    // specialized implementation for when the N <= 0
    // also the default case since N defaults to 0
}
```
In this example, we define a dummy templated struct `Range` that has a single Boolean template argument. Depending on the value of the boolean, the `Range<true>` and `Range<false>` are considered two different types by the compiler. 
It appears that if N is known at compile time (either a const, static, or a constexpr), then the `Range<(boolean expression)>` can be evaluated at compile time. The final evaluated value of `Range<>` then triggers compiler template specialization lookup rules.
At the end, the correct class is used.