---
layout: post
title:  "SFINAE in C++11 and beyond"
date:   2020-06-20 15:06:06 -0700
tags: cpp template
author: bolu-atx
categories: programming
---

As C++ coder, sooner or later you will encounter elements of meta-programming. 
It might be as simple a STL container. Or it might be a full blown template class that takes variadic arguments.
I, myself, have also taken this journey. As I ventured deeper into meta-programming, acronyms such as CRTP, SFINAE really piqued my interest. Today, let's talk about SFINAE.

**SFINAE** stands for "substitution failure is not an error", and there has been numerous articles, stack overflow questions and blog posts on this topic:

- [SFINAE introduction](https://jguegant.github.io/blogs/tech/sfinae-introduction.html) by Jean Guegant
- [cppreference.com SFINAE](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/sfinae)
- [SFINAE and enable if](https://eli.thegreenplace.net/2014/sfinae-and-enable_if/) by Eli Bendersky

My goal here is not to regurgigate what these excellent resources provide, but to summarize it in a concise way for my own learning and interpretation.

## What problem does it solve?

SFINAE is an idiom, or a programming pattern in C++. At its core, it enables compile time introspection of template parameters for more compact and generalizable code that can be reused later. They are frequently associated template meta-programming - so you should think about when they might come in handy if you work with a lot of templatized code.

Through SFINAE, we can write methods / struct / meta-helpers that help us answer questions like:
- Does the template argument `T` passed into this class at compile-time implement the method `foo()`?
- I want to have two `template<int N> Array` implementation (instead of having two different classes `SmallArray`, `LargeArray`) depending on the size of `N`.
- I want to have my template function `template<typename T> foo(T val)` behave differently depending on some condition on `T`, such as if it's a `float` type or an `int` type.

I also think of SFINAE pattern like function overload lookup on steroids, but also extended and applicable for classes, methods etc.

Prior to C++11, SFINAE implementations mostly uses template overload rules and clever use of the side-effects `sizeof` and `typedefs` to achieve this goal. With C++11's introduction of `std::decltype`, `std::declval`, and `std::enable_if`, the SFINAE pattern becomes a little easier to read and understand.


## Case Study

### C++11 switching f(T) based on whether T is an integer or a float
```cpp
template<typename T>
std::enable_if_t<std::is_integral<T>::value> f(T t){
    //integral version
}
template<typename T>
std::enable_if_t<std::is_floating_point<T>::value> f(T t){
    //floating point version
}
```


### Check whether a class has a certain member of certain type
```cpp
// Header
template<typename T>
struct TypeSink{
    using Type = void;
};

template<typename T>
using TypeSinkT = typename TypeSink<T>::Type;

//use case
template<typename T, typename=void>
struct HasBarOfTypeInt : std::false_type{};

template<typename T>
struct HasBarOfTypeInt<T, TypeSinkT<decltype(std::declval<T&>().*(&T::bar))>> :
    std::is_same<typename std::decay<decltype(std::declval<T&>().*(&T::bar))>::type,int>{};

struct S{
   int bar;
};
struct K{

};

template<typename T, typename = TypeSinkT<decltype(&T::bar)>>
void print(T){
    std::cout << "has bar" << std::endl;
}
void print(...){
    std::cout << "no bar" << std::endl;
}

int main(){
    print(S{});
    print(K{});
    std::cout << "bar is int: " << HasBarOfTypeInt<S>::value << std::endl;
}
```

###